---
layout: post
title: "Ahhh...theory, theory, theory."
date: 2019-4-6 10:00:00
blurb: "A look at an example post using Bay Jekyll theme."
og_image: /assets/img/content/post-example/Banner.jpg
math: true
---

I was up till 3:30. There was no way that I would sleep before the problem would.

As it turns out, the integral equation that I discussed earlier is well-known. It is an example of a *linear Volterra equation of the first kind*.
\\[f(c)=\int_{a}^{c}{K(c,x)\rho(x)\textrm{ d}x}\\]
The function \\(K\\) is known as the *kernel*. In our case, the kernel is:
\\[K(c,x)=c+b-x\\]
The idea here is to use the Leibniz integral rule (which follows from Fundamental Theorem). By differentiating both sides with respect to \\(c\\), we obtain:
\\[\frac{\textrm{d}}{\textrm{d}c}\left(\int_{c}^{\infty}{(c+b-x)\rho(x)\textrm{ d}x}\right)=\frac{\textrm{d}R}{\textrm{d}t}\lim_{R\rightarrow\infty}{\left[(c+b-R)\rho(R)\right]}-b\rho(x)+\int_{c}^{\infty}{\rho(x)\textrm{ d}x}\\]
Observe that if \\(G(c, R)=\int_{c}^{R}{(c+b-x)\rho(x)\textrm{ d}x}\\) is <a href="https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1191566/leibniz-rule-for-improper-integral/2015165#2015165" target="_blank">well-behaved</a>, then we may interchange the limit and derivative above to obtain:
\\[\frac{\textrm{d}R}{\textrm{d}t}\lim_{R\rightarrow\infty}{\left[(c+b-R)\rho(R)\right]}=\lim_{R\rightarrow\infty}{\left[(c+b-R)\rho(R)\frac{\textrm{d}R}{\textrm{d}t}\right]}=0\\]
As cited, the conditions we want for \\(G\\) for this manipulation to be valid are:

- The derivative of \\(G\\) WRT \\(c\\) must converge uniformly,
- \\(G\\) itself must converge for some \\(c\\).

Both of these conditions are intuitively obvious. By our original Volterra equation, the second condition is satisfied \\(\forall c>0\\). We assume the first condition now, and can prove it later by showing that the product of the kernel and \\(\rho\\) is uniformly convergent.

Anyway, we have:
\\[b\rho(c)=\int_{c}^{\infty}{\rho(x)\textrm{ d}x}\\]
Let \\(P'=\rho\\). Then, by the Fundamental Theorem:
\\[bP'(c)=\lim_{R\rightarrow\infty}{P(R)}-P(c)\\]
Let \\(L=\lim_{R\rightarrow\infty}{P(R)}\\). Then, the equation above rearranges to:
\\[P'+\frac{1}{b}P=\frac{L}{b}\\]
This is simply a first-order linear ODE. We solve this by using an integrating factor of \\(\exp{\int{\frac{1}{b}\textrm{ d}{x}}}\\). This yields:
\\[P(x)=L+Ce^{-x/b}\\]
Differentiating this, we obtain:
\\[\boxed{\rho(x)=Ce^{-x/b}}\\]
Obviously with \\(C>0\\).

Uniform convergence is forced by the fact that this solution satisfies our Volterra equation. It can probably also be proven with \\(\epsilon\\)-\\(\delta\\) calculations. That's for another time. And I'm done with mechanics for this weekend I think.