---
layout: post
title: "Updates"
date: 2021-3-11 10:00:00 -0400
blurb: "A look at an example post using Bay Jekyll theme."
og_image: /assets/img/content/post-example/Banner.jpg
math: true
---
Yeah, I know. Long time no see. I've been busy. I do intend to add all the stuff that has been on my mind eventually. Anyway, a quick update.

1. The Putnam sucked this year. I didn't prepare, hadn't done combinatorics in ages, and for some reason took a hike the day of the contest which left me exhausted. < 10 points for sure, though probably nonzero.
2. I think my research project in astrophysics is complete. Well actually incomplete, but the PI has left UCSD and hasn't got back to me, so I presume that we are done working together. It isn't what I want to pursue down the road, but it was a very valuable learning experience. I ought to make a post at least outlining some of the technical details of what we did and what we tried to do. Apart from technical things, I learned a fundamental quality of research: that it is quite unstructured. There is no set of instructions or guidelines.
3. I will be attending the math REU at UCSB this summer! The most exciting news in several years I think? This is not quite up there with my acceptance to UCSD for undergrad (in terms of excitement), but I would say it's roughly the same order of magnitude. So it is definitely the best news I've had in two years. I will be working on analysis in almost Abelian spaces with Prof. Zhirayr Avetisyan. Some more details can be found <a href="https://web.math.ucsb.edu/REU/Problems%202020/Zhirayr%20problems.pdf" target="_blank">here</a>. The topic aligns very well with my current interests and I'm incredibly hyped about this. The application process was quite grueling. I applied to 3 physics REUs and 13 math REUs for a total of 16 REU applications.
4. I am looking to apply to the math honors program at UCSD. If accepted, I will write an honors thesis under the guidance of a faculty advisor. I will be attempting to do this in algebraic geometry. I don't want to disclose information about advisors yet, but needless to say I have been leaning towards a math PhD program (over physics) for several months now.


Overall, good progress I would say. Not much more I could ask for during a pandemic.